
CHAPTER I
When I was six years old, I once saw a magnificent picture in a book on the virgin forest
called Stories of Life. It was a boa constrictor that had swallowed a wild beast. Here is a
copy of the drawing.
It was written in the book, Boa constrictors swallow their whole prey without chewing.
Then they cannot move and they sleep during the six months of their digestion.
I then thought a lot about the adventures of the jungle and, in turn, succeeded, with a
colored pencil, in drawing my very first drawing. It was like this:
I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups and asked them if my drawing frightened
them.
They said, Why would a hat be scary?
My drawing was not of a hat. It was a boa constrictor digesting an elephant. I then drew
the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the grown-ups could understand. They always
required more explanation. My second drawing was like this:
The grown-ups advised me to leave aside the drawings of boa constrictors from the
outside or the inside, and to interest myself instead in geography, history, calculation, and
grammar. Thus, at the age of six, I abandoned a magnificent career as a painter. I had been
discouraged by the failure of my first drawing and my second drawing. Grown-ups never
understand anything on their own, and it is tiring for children to always have to give them
explanations.
So I had to choose another profession. I learned to fly planes. I flew all over the world.
And geography, thatŐs right, served me well. I knew how to recognize, at first glance,
China, or Arizona. It is useful if you have gone astray during the night.
I have had, in the course of my life, a lot of contact with many serious people. I have lived
among the grown-ups. I saw them up close. It did not really improve my opinion of them.
When I met one that seemed to me a little lucid, I had them experience my drawing
number 1, which I had preserved. I wanted to know if they could come to a real
understanding. But they always replied: ItŐs a hat. After that I spoke to them neither of boa
constrictors, nor of virgin forests, nor of stars. I put myself within their reach. I talked
about bridge, golf, politics, and ties. And the grown-ups were glad to know such a
reasonable man.

CHAPTER II
So I lived alone, with no one to talk to, until a breakdown in the Sahara desert six years
ago. Something had broken in my engine. And since I had neither a mechanic nor a
passenger with me, I prepared to try, by myself, to make a difficult reprieve. It was a
matter of life and death. I had hardly any water to drink for a week.
The first night I fell asleep on the sand a thousand miles from any inhabited land. I was
much more isolated than a castaway on a raft in the middle of the ocean. Then you
imagine my surprise, at dawn, when a funny little voice woke me up. She said:
Ó Please draw me a sheep !
- Hein!
- Draw me a sheepÉ
Ň
I jumped on my feet as if I had been struck by lightning. I rubbed my eyes well. I watched.
And I saw a very extraordinary little man who looked at me gravely. This is the best
portrait I later managed to make of him.
But my drawing, of course, is much less ravishing than the model. It is not my fault. I had
been discouraged in my career as a painter by the grown-ups at the age of six, and I had
learned nothing to draw, except closed boas and open boas.
I looked at this apparition with eyes full of astonishment. Do not forget that I was a
thousand miles from any inhabited region. Now my little fellow seemed to me neither
astray, nor dead of fatigue, nor dead of hunger, nor death of thirst, nor dead of fear. He had
not the appearance of a child lost in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any
inhabited region. When I finally succeeded in speaking, I said to him:
Ó What are you doing here ? Ň
And he repeated to me, very gently, as a very serious thing:
Ó Please draw me a sheepÉ
Ň
When the mystery is too impressive, we do not dare to disobey. As absurd as it seemed to
me a thousand miles from all inhabited places and in danger of death, I took out of my
pocket a sheet of paper and a pen. But I remembered that I had studied geography, history,
calculation and grammar, and I told the little fellow (with a little bad humor) that I did not
know how to draw. He replied,
Ó It does not matter. Draw me a sheep.
Ň
As I had never drawn a sheep, I thought of him as one of the only two drawings of which I
was capable. That of the boa closed. And I was astounded to hear the little fellow reply:
Ó No ! No ! I do not want an elephant in a boa. A boa is very dangerous, and an elephant is
very cumbersome. My place is tight. I need a sheep. Draw me a sheep.
Ó
I drew. Then
He looked attentively, then:
Ó No ! That one is already very ill. Do another one.
Ň
I drew:
He looked attentively, then:
ŇNo! That one is already very ill. Do another one.
Ň
I drew:
My friend smiled gently, indulgently:
ŇYou see É itŐs not a sheep, itŐs a ram. He has horns É
Ň
So I still refused my drawing:
But he was refused, like the preceding ones:
ŇThis one is too old. I want a long-lived sheep.
Ň
Then, for lack of patience, as I was anxious to begin the dismantling of my engine, I
scribbled this drawing:
Then I threw :
ŇThatŐs the box. The sheep you want is in it.
Ň
But I was much surprised to see the face of my young judge illuminated:
ŇThatŐs exactly how I wanted it!Ó Do you think that sheep are to be found in this country?
- Why ?
- Because at home itŐs very small É
- Surely that will suffice. I gave you a tiny sheep.
Ň
He leaned his head toward the drawing:
ŇNot so small as that. He fell asleepÉ
Ň
And so I made the acquaintance of the little prince.

CHAPTER III
It took me a long time to understand where he came from. The little prince, who asked me
many questions, never seemed to hear mine. These are words spoken by chance that, little
by little, have revealed all to me. So when he saw my plane for the first time (I will not
draw my plane, it is a drawing too complicated for me) he asked me:
ŇWhat is that thing?Ó
- ItŐs not a thing. It flies. ItŐs a plane. This is my plane.
Ň
And I was proud to tell him I was flying. Then he exclaimed:
ŇHow! You have fallen from heaven!
- Y es, I said modestly.
ŇAh! Now thatŐs funnyÉ
Ň
And the little prince had a very pretty burst of laughter, which irritated me very much. I
wish to take my misfortunes seriously. Then he added:
ŇThen you too come from heaven!Ó What planet are you from?
I caught a glimpse in the mystery of his presence, and I suddenly questioned:
ŇSo youŐre from another planet?Ó
But he did not answer me. He nodded softly as he looked at my plane:
ŇItŐs true that you cannot come very far from it.
Ó
And he sank into a reverie that lasted for a long time. Then, taking my sheep out of his
pocket, he plunged into the contemplation of his treasure.
Y ou can imagine how intrigued I was by this half-confidence about Ňthe other planets.
Ó I
therefore endeavored to learn more:
ŇWhere do you come from, my little fellow?Ó Where is Ňat homeÓ? Where do you want to
take my sheep?
He replied after a meditative silence:
ŇWhat is good, with the box you gave me, is that, at night, it will serve him as a house.
Ó
- Of course. And if you are kind, I will also give you a rope to tie it up during the day. And
a picket.
Ň
The proposal seemed to shock the little prince:
ŇAttach it?Ó What a funny idea !
ŇBut if you do not tie him, heŐll go anywhere, and heŐll get lost.
Ó
And my friend burst into laughter again:
- But where do you want him to go !
- Anywhere. Right in front of himÉ
Then the little prince gravely remarked,
- It does not matter, itŐs so small, at home!
And, with a little melancholy, perhaps, he added:
- Straight ahead you can not go far É

CHAPTER IV
I had learned a second very important thing: that its original planet was scarcely larger
than a house!
It could not surprise me much. I knew that besides the big planets like the Earth, Jupiter,
Mars, Venus, which have been given names, there are hundreds of others that are
sometimes so small that it is very hard for them To see the telescope. When an astronomer
discovers one of them, he names it as a number. He calls it, for example,
Ňthe asteroid
325Ó.
I have serious reasons to believe that the planet from which the little prince came is the
asteroid B 612. This asteroid was seen only once in 1909 by a Turkish astronomer in the
telescope.
He had then made a great demonstration of his discovery at an International Astronomy
Congress. But nobody believed him because of his costume. Big people are like that.
Fortunately for the reputation of the asteroid B 612, a Turkish dictator imposed on his
people, under penalty of death, to dress European. The astronomer resumed his
demonstration in 1920, in a very elegant dress. And this time everyone was of his opinion.
If I have told you these details about the asteroid B 612 and if I have given you its number,
it is because of the big people. Big people like the numbers. When you tell them about a
new friend, they never question you about the basics. They never tell you,
ŇWhat is the
sound of his voice?Ó What games does he prefer? Does he collect butterflies? They ask,
ŇHow old is he?Ó How many brothers? How much does he weigh ? How much does his
father earn? Then they only think they know him. If you say to the grown-ups: ŇI saw a
beautiful pink brick house, with geraniums on the windows and doves on the roof É
Ó they
can not imagine this house. We must say to them: ŇI have seen a house of one hundred
thousand francs. Then they cried: ŇHow pretty it is! Ň
So if you say to them: ŇThe proof that the little prince existed is that he was delightful,
that he laughed, and that he wanted a sheep. When you want a sheep, it is proof that you
exist,
Ňthey will shrug their shoulders and treat you as a child! But if you tell them,
ŇThe
planet where it came from is asteroid B 612Ó then they will be convinced, and they will
leave you alone with their questions. TheyŐre like that. We must not blame them. Children
should be very lenient towards adults.
But, of course, we who understand life, we make fun of the numbers! I would have liked
to start this story like fairy tales. I would have liked to say:
ŇOnce upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a planet hardly larger than
himself, and who needed a friend É
Ó For those who understand life, it would have
seemed much more true.
Because I do not like to read my book lightly. I feel so sorry to recount these memories.
ItŐs six years since my friend went away with his sheep. If I try to describe it here, it is so
as not to forget it. ItŐs sad to forget a friend. Not everyone has had a friend. And I can
become like the grown-ups who are interested only in numbers. So thatŐs why I bought a
box of colors and pencils. ItŐs hard to go back to drawing, at my age, when no other
attempt has ever been made than that of a closed boa and that of an open boa at the age of
six! I will try, of course, to make portraits as resembling as possible. But IŐm not quite
sure IŐm going to succeed. One drawing goes, and the other does not look any more. I
make some errors, also on the size. Here the little prince is too big. There he is too small. I
also hesitate about the color of his costume. Then I fumbled like this and that, as best I
could. At last I shall be mistaken about certain more important details. But that will have
to be forgiven. My friend never gave an explanation. He thought I might be like him. But
I, unfortunately, I do not know how to see the sheep through the crates. I may be a bit like
grown-ups. I must have got older.

CHAPTER V
Every day I learned something on the planet, on departure, on the journey. It came very
gently, at the chance of reflections. Thus, on the third day, I knew the drama of the
baobabs.
This time again it was thanks to the sheep, for suddenly the little prince interrogated me,
as if caught in a serious doubt:
ŇIt is true, is it not, that sheep eat the shrubs?Ó
- Y es. That is true.
ŇAh! I am happy ! Ň
I did not understand why it was so important that the sheep ate the shrubs. But the little
prince added:
ŇSo they also eat the baobabs?Ó Ň
I remarked to the little prince that the baobab trees are not shrubs, but trees as large as
churches, and that even if they carried with them a whole herd of elephants, this flock
would not be able to overcome a single baobab .
The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh:
ŇWe should put them on top of each other É
Ó
But he remarked wisely:
ŇThe baobabs, before growing, it starts off being small.
- ThatŐs right ! But why do you want your sheep to eat the little baobabs? Ň
He replied,
ŇWell! Come on! ŇAs it was obvious. And it took me a great effort of
intelligence to understand to myself this problem.
And indeed, on the planet of the little prince, there was, as on all the planets, good grasses
and weeds. Therefore good seeds of good weeds and bad seeds of weeds. But the seeds are
invisible. They sleep in the secret of the earth until it takes fancy for one of them to wake
up. Then she stretched herself, and at first shoved timidly toward the sun a ravishing little
harmless little twig. If it is a twig of radish or rose bush, you can let it grow as it wants.
But if it is a bad plant, it is necessary to tear the plant immediately, as soon as it is known
to recognize it. Now there were terrible seeds on the planet of the little prince É these
were the seeds of baobabs. The soil of the planet was infested. Now a baobab, if one takes
it too late, one can never get rid of it any more. It encumbers the whole planet. He
perforing her with his roots. And if the planet is too small, and if the baobabs are too
numerous, they make it burst.
ŇItŐs a matter of discipline,
Ó the little prince later told me. When you have finished your
morning toilet, you have to do the toilet of the planet carefully. It is necessary to regularly
bite the baobabs as soon as they are distinguished from the roses to which they resemble
very much when they are very young. ItŐs a very boring job, but very easy.
Ň
And one day he advised me to apply myself to a beautiful drawing, in order to bring it into
the heads of the children of my house.
ŇIf they travel one day,
Ó he said to me,
Ňthat could
serve them. It is sometimes inconvenient to postpone his work. But if it is a question of the
baobabs, it is always a catastrophe. I knew a planet, inhabited by a lazy. He had neglected
three shrubs É
Ň
And, on the instructions of the little prince, I drew this planet. I do not like to take the tone
of a moralist. But the danger of the baobabs is so little known, and the risks run by the one
wandering in an asteroid are so considerable, that for once I am an exception to my
reserve. I said,
ŇChildren! Pay attention to the baobabs! It was to warn my friends of the
danger that they had been for a long time, like myself, without knowing it, that I had
worked so much on this drawing. The lesson I gave was worth it. You may wonder: Why
are there not other drawings in this book as grandiose as the drawing of the baobabs? The
answer is very simple: I tried but I could not succeed. When I drew the baobabs I was
animated by the feeling of urgency.

CHAPTER VI
Ah! Little prince, I have understood, little by little, your little melancholy life. You had
only for a long distraction the sweetness of the sunsets. I learned this new detail, on the
fourth day in the morning, when you said to me:
ŇI like the sunsets. LetŐs see a sunset É
- But you have to waitÉ
- Wait for what ?
- Wait until the sun goes down.
Ň
You looked very surprised at first, and then you laughed at yourself. And you said to me:
Ó I always feel at home ! Ň
Indeed. When it is noon in the United States, the sun, as everyone knows, lies on France.
It would be enough to be able to go to France in one minute to watch the sunset.
Unfortunately France is far too far away. But, on your little planet, it was enough for you
to pull your chair a few steps. And you were watching twilight whenever you wished É
ŇOne day I saw the sun go down forty-four times! Ň
And a little later you added:
ŇYou know É when youŐre so sad you like the sunsets É
Ó
ŇSo the day of the forty-four times you were so sad?Ó Ň
But the little prince did not answer.

CHAPTER VII
The fifth day, always thanks to the sheep, this secret of the life of the little prince was
revealed to me. He asked me brusquely, without preamble, as the fruit of a problem long
meditated in silence:
ŇA sheep, if he eats the shrubs, he also eats the flowers?Ó
ŇA sheep eats whatever he meets.
Ó
ŇEven flowers that have thorns?Ó
- Y es. Even flowers that have thorns.
ŇThen the thorns, what are they for?Ó Ň
I did not know. I was then very busy trying to unscrew a too tight bolt from my engine. I
was very worried because my breakdown was beginning to appear very serious, and the
drinking water that was exhausted made me fear the worst.
ŇThorns, what are they used for?Ó Ň
The little prince never renounced a question once he had asked it. I was irritated by my
bolt and I answered no matter what:
ŇThorns are useless, itŐs pure wickedness on the part of flowers!
- Oh ! Ň
But after a pause he threw me, with a sort of rancor:
Ó I do not believe you ! Flowers are weak. They are naive. They reassure themselves as
best they can. They think they are terrible with their thorns É
Ň
I made no reply. At that moment I said to myself: ŇIf this bolt still resists, IŐll blow it up
with a hammer. The little prince again disturbed my reflections:
ŇAnd you think that flowers É
Ó
- But no ! But no ! I do not believe anything! I answered anything. I am busy with serious
things! Ň
He looked at me stunned.
ŇSerious things! Ň
He saw me, with my hammer in my hand, and my fingers black with shimmering, bending
over an object which seemed very ugly to him.
ŇYou talk like grown-ups!Ó Ň
It made me a little ashamed. But, pitiless, he added:
ŇYou confuse everything É you mix everything! Ň
He was really very irritated. He shook the gilded hair in the wind:
ŇI know a planet where there is a crimson gentleman. He never breathed a flower. He
never looked at a star. He never loved anyone. He has never done anything other than
additions. And all day he repeats like you: ŇI am a serious man! I am a serious man!Ó And
it makes him swell with pride. But itŐs not a man, itŐs a mushroom!
- A what ?
- A fungus ! Ň
The little prince was now pale with anger.
ŇMillions of years ago flowers make thorns. Millions of years ago the sheep still eat the
flowers. And it is not serious to try to understand why they are doing so much trouble to
make thorns that are never used for anything? ItŐs not important the war of sheep and
flowers? This is not serious and more important than the additions of a big red gentleman?
And if I know a flower unique in the world, which exists nowhere, except in my planet,
and a little sheep can annihilate at once, like that, one morning, without realizing What he
does is not important! Ň
He blushed, then resumed:
ŇIf someone loves a flower that only exists in one million and millions of stars, thatŐs
enough for him to be happy when he looks at them. He said to himself: ŇMy flower is
there somewhere É
Ó But if the sheep eats the flower, it is for him as if, suddenly, all the
stars were extinguished! And thatŐs not important! Ň
He could say nothing more. He suddenly burst into tears. Night had fallen. I had let go of
my tools. I made fun of my hammer, my bolt, my thirst and my death. There was on a star,
a planet, mine, the Earth, a little prince to console! I took him in my arms. I rocked him. I
said to him: ŇThe flower you love is not in danger É I will draw a muzzle to your sheep
É I will draw an armor for your flower É I É
Ó I did not know what to say. I felt very
awkward. I did not know how to reach it, where to join it É It is so mysterious, the land
of tears!

CHAPTER VIII
I soon learned more about this flower. There had always been very simple flowers on the
planet of the little prince, adorned with a single row of petals, and which held no room,
and which did not disturb any one. They appeared one morning in the grass, and then they
were extinguished in the evening. But that one had germinated one day, of a seed brought
from somewhere, and the little prince had watched very closely that twig that did not
resemble the other twigs. It could be a new kind of baobab. But the shrub soon ceased to
grow, and began to prepare a flower. The little prince, who was watching the installation
of an enormous button, felt that a miraculous apparition would emerge, but the flower did
not finish preparing to be beautiful, sheltered from his green room . She carefully chose
her colors. She dressed slowly, she adjusted her petals one by one. She did not want to get
out of it all like the poppies. She wanted to appear only in the full radiance of her beauty.
Hey! Y es. She was very coquette! His mysterious dress had lasted days and days. And
then one morning, just at sunrise, she had shown herself.
And she, who had worked so precisely, said in yawning:
ŇAh! IŐm just waking up É I beg your pardon É IŐm still disheveled É
Ň
The little prince, then, could not contain his admiration:
Ó How beautiful you are !
ŇIs not that right,
Ó the flower replied softly. And I was born at the same time as the sun É
Ň
The little prince guessed that she was not too modest, but she was so moving!
ŇItŐs time, I think, for breakfast,
Ó she would soon add,
Ňwould you have the kindness to
think of me?Ó
And the little prince, quite confused, having sought a watering-can of fresh water, had
served the flower.
So had she quickly tormented him by his somewhat shady vanity. One day, for example,
speaking of her four thorns, she had said to the little prince:
ŇThey can come, the tigers, with their claws!
ŇThere are no tigers on my planet,
Ó objected the little prince,
eat grass.
Ó
- I am not a grass, had gently replied the flower.
- Excuse meÉ
Ňand then the tigers do not
ŇI have no fear of tigers, but I hate currents of air.
Ó Y ou would not have a screen? Ň
ŇHorror of drafts É it is not luck, for a plant, had noticed the little prince. This flower is
very complicated É Č
ŇIn the evening you will put me under a globe. ItŐs very cold at home. ItŐs badly installed.
Where I come fromÉ
Ň
But she had interrupted herself. It had come in the form of a seed. She had not known
anything about other worlds. Humiliated at having allowed herself to be surprised at
preparing such a naive lie, she coughed two or three times to put the little prince into his
wrong:
ŇThis screen?Ó
É
- I was going to get him but you were talking to me! Ň
Then she had forced her cough to inflict remorse.
Thus the little prince, notwithstanding the goodwill of his love, soon doubted her. He had
taken unimportant words seriously, and had become very unhappy.
ŇI should not have listened to him,
Ó he confided to me one day,
Ňyou must never listen to
flowers. You have to look at them and breathe them. Mine embalmed my planet, but I
could not rejoice. This story of claws, which had so annoyed me, should have tempted me
Ň
É
He again confided to me:
ŇI did not understand anything! I should have judged her on the acts and not the words.
She embarrassed me and enlightened me. I should never have fled! I should have guessed
his tenderness behind his poor tricks. The flowers are so contradictory! But I was too
young to know how to love him.
Ň

CHAPTER IX
Je crois quŐil profita, pour son Žvasion, dŐune migration dŐoiseaux sauvages.
I believe that he took advantage of a migration of wild birds for his escape. On the
morning of the departure he put his planet in order. He carefully roamed his active
volcanoes. He had two active volcanoes. And it was very convenient to warm up the
morning breakfast. He also possessed an extinct volcano. But, as he said,
ŇYou never
know!Ó He therefore also roamed the extinct volcano. If they are well swept, volcanoes
burn gently and regularly, without eruptions. Volcanic eruptions are like chimney fires.
Obviously on our land we are much too small to swallow our volcanoes. ThatŐs why
theyŐre causing us a lot of trouble.
The little prince also snatched, with a little melancholy, the last shoots of baobabs. He
thought he would never have to come back. But all these familiar labors appeared to him,
that morning, extremely sweet. And when he watered the flower for the last time, and
prepared to shelter it under his globe, he discovered the desire to weep.
ŇFarewell,
Ó he said to the flower.
But she did not answer.
ŇFarewell,
Ó he repeated.
The flower coughed. But it was not because of his cold.
ŇI was a fool,
Ó she said at last. I beg your pardon. Strive to be happy.
Ň
He was surprised by the absence of reproaches. He remained there, disconcerted, the globe
in the air. He did not understand this quiet sweetness.
ŇY es, I love you,
Ó said the flower. Y ou did not know, by my fault. It has no importance.
But you were as stupid as I was. Task to be happy É Leave this globe quiet. I do not want
it anymore.
- But the wind É
- IŐm not so cold as that É The cool air of the night will do me good. IŐm a flower.
- But the beasts É
ŇI must bear two or three caterpillars if I want to know the butterflies.
Ó It seems that it is
so beautiful. Otherwise who will visit me? You will be far away. As for the big beasts, I
fear nothing. I have my claws.
Ň
And she naively showed her four thorns. Then she added:
ŇDo not drag like that, itŐs annoying. You decided to leave. Go away.
Ň
For she did not want him to see her crying. It was such a proud flower É

CHAPTER X
He was in the region of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329 and 330. He therefore began
by visiting them to search for an occupation and to learn.
The first was inhabited by a king. The king sat, dressed in purple and ermine, on a very
simple and yet majestic throne.
ŇAh! Here is a subject! Cried the king, when he perceived the little prince.
And the little prince asked himself:
ŇHow can he recognize me since he has never seen me before?Ó Ň
He did not know that for kings, the world is very simplified. All men are subjects.
ŇCome closer, IŐll see you better,
Ó said the king, who was very proud to be king at last.
The little prince sought eyes to sit down, but the planet was cluttered with the magnificent
ermine mantle. So he stood, and as he was tired he yawned.
ŇIt is contrary to the etiquette of yawning in the presence of a king,
Ó said the monarch. I
forbid it.
ŇI can not help myself,
Ó replied the little prince, quite confused. I did a long trip and I did
not sleep É
ŇThen,
Ó said the king,
ŇI command you to yawn.
Ó I have not seen anyone yawning for
years. Y awns are curiosities for me. Come on! Still yawns. ItŐs an order.
ŇThat intimidates me É I can not É
Ó said the little prince, blushing.
- Um! Hum! Replied the king. Then I É I order you to yawn and sometimes to É
He stammered a little and seemed vexed.
Ň
For the King was essentially concerned that his authority should be respected. He did not
tolerate disobedience. He was an absolute monarch. But as he was very good, he gave
reasonable orders.
ŇIf I commanded,
Ó said he,
Ňif I ordered a general to change into a sea-bird, and if the
general did not obey, it would not be the generalŐs fault.
Ó It would be my fault.
Ň
Ó May I sit ? Inquired the little prince, timidly.
ŇI order you to sit down,
Ó replied the king, who brought back majestically a piece of his
ermine cloak.
But the little prince was astonished. The planet was tiny. On what could the king reign?
ŇSire,
Ó said he,
ŇI beg your pardon to ask you questions.
Ó
ŇI order you to question me,
Ó said the King.
ŇSire, on what do you reign?Ó
ŇAbove all,
Ó replied the king, with great simplicity.
- Mostly ? Ň
The king, with a discreet gesture, pointed to his planet, the other planets and the stars.
ŇAbout all that?Ó Said the little prince.
ŇOn all that,
Ó replied the king.
For not only was he an absolute monarch but he was a universal monarch.
ŇAnd the stars obey you?Ó
ŇOf course,
Ó said the king. They obey at once. I do not tolerate indiscipline.
Ň
Such a power marveled the little prince. If he had relaxed it himself, he might have been
present, not at forty-four, but at seventy-two, or even a hundred, or even two hundred
sunsets in the same day, To pull his chair! And as he felt a little sad because of the
memory of his little abandoned planet, he boldly solicited a favor from the king:
ŇI would like to see a sunset É Do me a favor É Order the sun to lie down É
ŇIf I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly, or write a tragedy,
or change into a sea-bird, and if the general did not execute The order received, which of
him or of me would be in his wrong?
ŇIt would be you,
Ó said the little prince firmly.
- Exact. We must demand of each one what each one can give,
Ňreplied the king. Authority
rests first on reason. If thou commandest thy people to go throw themselves into the sea,
they shall make a revolution. I have the right to demand obedience because my orders are
reasonable.
ŇThen my sunset?Ó Reminded the little prince, who never forgot a question once he had
asked it.
- Y our sunset, you will have it. I will demand it. But I shall wait, in my science of the
government, for the conditions to be favorable.
ŇWhen will it be?Ó Inquired the little prince.
- Hem! Hem! Replied the king, who at first consulted a large calendar,
Ňhem! Hem! It will
be, towards-towards-it will be this evening towards seven forty! And you will see how
well I am obeyed.
Ň
The little prince yawned. He regretted his failed sunset. And then he was already bored a
little:
ŇI have nothing more to do here,
Ó he said to the king. IŐll go again!
ŇDo not go,
Ó replied the king, who was so proud of having a subject. Do not go, I make
you a minister!
- Minister of what?
- Of É of Justice!
ŇBut there is no one to judge!Ó
ŇWe do not know,
Ó said the king. I have not yet gone round my kingdom. I am very old, I
have no place for a coach, and it tires me to walk.
- Oh ! But I have already seen,
Ňsaid the little prince, who bent down to glance at the other
side of the planet. ThereŐs no one there eitherŃ
ŇYou will judge yourself, then,
Ó replied the king. This is the most difficult. It is much
more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others. If you manage to judge yourself well,
it is because you are a true wise man.
ŇI,
Ó said the little prince,
Ňcan judge myself anywhere.
Ó I do not need to live here.
- Hem! Hem! Said the king,
ŇI believe that on my planet there is somewhere an old rat. I
hear it at night. Y ou can judge that old rat. You will condemn him to death from time to
time. So his life will depend on your righteousness. But you will pardon it every time to
save it. There is only one.
ŇI,
Ó replied the little prince,
Ňdo not like to condemn to death, and I believe I am going.
Ó
ŇNo,
Ó said the king.
But the little prince, having finished his preparations, would not trouble the old monarch:
ŇIf your majesty wished to be obeyed punctually,
Ó she might give me a reasonable order.
She could order me, for example, to leave before one minute. It seems to me that the
conditions are favorable É
Ň
The king having replied nothing, the little prince hesitated at first, then, with a sigh, took
the departure.
ŇI make you my ambassador,
Ó then hastened to cry the king.
He had an air of authority.
Great people are very strange, the little prince said to himself, during his journey.

CHAPTER XI
The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man:
ŇAh! Ah! Here is the visit of an admirer! Exclaimed the vanity from a distance as soon as
he saw the little prince.
For, for the conceited, other men are admirers.
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the little prince. Y ou have a funny hat.
ŇIt is to salute,
Ó replied the conceited. It is to greet when I am acclaimed. Unfortunately it
never passes anybody here.
- Ah yes ? Said the little prince, who did not understand.
ŇStrike your hands one against the other,
Ó advised the conceited man.
The little prince struck his hands against each other. The conceited man modestly saluted
his hat.
ŇThis is more amusing than the visit to the king,
Ó said the little prince to himself. And he
began again to strike his hands one against the other. The conceited man began to salute,
raising his hat.
After five minutes of exercise the little prince got tired of the monotony of the game:
ŇAnd so that the hat falls,
Ó he asked,
Ňwhat is to be done? Ň
But the vain did not hear it. Vainites never hear anything but praise.
ŇDo you really admire me a lot? He asked the little prince.
- What does it mean to admire?
- To admire means to recognize that I am the most beautiful, the best dressed, the richest
and the most intelligent man on the planet.
- But youŐre alone on your planet!
- Make me this pleasure. Admire me anyway!
ŇI admire you,
Ó said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders a little,
Ňbut how can that
interest you?Ó
And the little prince departed.
ŇThe grown-ups are decidedly bizarre,
Ó he told himself simply during his journey.

CHAPTER XII
The next planet was inhabited by a drinker. This visit was very short, but she plunged the
little prince into a great melancholy:
Ó What are you doing here ? He said to the drinker, whom he found installed in silence
before a collection of empty bottles and a collection of full bottles.
ŇI drink,
Ó replied the drinker, with a lugubrious air.
ŇWhy do you drink?Ó Asked the little prince.
ŇTo forget,
Ó replied the drinker.
- To forget what? Inquired the little prince, who already pitied him.
ŇTo forget that I am ashamed,
Ó confessed the drinker, lowering his head.
ŇShame on what? Inquired the little prince who wished to succor him.
ŇShame on you to drink! Finished the drinker, who locked himself up in silence.
And the little prince left, puzzled.
ŇBig people are definitely very bizarre,
Ó he told himself during the trip.

CHAPTER XIII
The fourth planet was that of the businessman. This man was so busy that he did not even
raise his head at the arrival of the little prince.
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the latter. Y our cigarette is extinguished.
- Three and two are five. Five and seven twelve. Twelve and three. Hello. Fifteen and
ninety-two. Twenty-two and six-eight. No time to turn it back on. Twenty-six and five
thirty-one. Phew! So itŐs five hundred one million six hundred twenty-two thousand seven
hundred and thirty-one.
ŇFive hundred million of what?Ó
- Hey? YouŐre still here ? Five hundred a million É I do not know É I have so much
work! I am serious, I do not amuse myself with nonsense! Two and five É
- Five hundred million of what? ŇRepeated the little prince, who, in his life, had never
renounced a question once he had asked it.
The businessman raised his head:
ŇFor the past fifty-four years I have lived on this planet, I have only been disturbed three
times. The first time it was twenty-two years ago, by a cockchart that had fallen, God
knows where. He spread a terrible noise, and I made four errors in an addition. The second
time, eleven years ago, was a crisis of rheumatism. I lack exercise. I do not have time to
stroll. IŐm serious. The third time É here it is! So I said five hundred million É
- Millions of what? Ň
The businessman understood that there was no hope of peace:
ŇMillions of these little things that one sees sometimes in the sky.
- Flies ?
- But no, little things that shine.
- Bees ?
- But no. Little golden things that make the idlers laugh. But I am serious! I do not have
time to daydream.
ŇAh! stars ?
- ThatŐs right. Stars.
ŇAnd what do you do with five hundred million stars?Ó
- Five hundred and one million six hundred and twenty-two thousand seven hundred and
thirty-one. I am serious, I am precise.
ŇAnd what do you do with these stars?Ó
- What do I do with it?
- Y es.
- Nothing. I own them.
- Y ou got the stars?
- Y es.
ŇBut IŐve already seen a king who-
Ó
- Kings do not possess. They ŇreignÓ over. It is very different.
ŇAnd what is the use of possessing the stars?Ó
- ItŐs good for me to be rich.
ŇAnd what does it cost you to be rich?Ó
- To buy other stars, if someone finds them.
Ň
ŇThat one,
Ó said the little prince to himself,
However, he asked further questions:
ŇHow can one possess the stars?Ó
- Who are they? Riposta, grumpy, businessman.
- I do not know. To no one.
Ňhe reasoned a little like my drunkard.
Ň
ŇThen they belong to me, for I thought of it first.
Ó
- ThatŐs enough ?
- Of course. When you find a diamond that belongs to no one, it is yours. When you find
an island that belongs to no one, it is yours. When you have an idea first, you patent it: it is
yours. And I possess the stars, since no one before me thought of possessing them.
ŇThat is true,
Ó said the little prince. And what do you do with it?
- I deal with them. I count them and recount them, says the businessman. ItŐs difficult. But
IŐm a serious man! Ň
The little prince was not satisfied yet.
ŇIf I have a scarf, I can put it around my neck and take it away.
Ó I, if I possess a flower,
can pluck my flower and carry it away. But you cannot pick the stars!
ŇNo, but I can put them in a bank.
Ó
- What does it mean ?
ŇThat means I write on a little paper the number of my stars. And then I lock this paper in
a drawer.
- And thatŐs all ?
- ThatŐs enough ! Ň
ŇItŐs amusing,
Ó thought the little prince. ItŐs pretty poetic. But it is not very serious.
Ň
The little prince had very different ideas about the serious things of the ideas of the grown-
up.
ŇI,
Ó he said again,
Ňhave a flower that I water every day. I have three volcanoes that I
shake every week. For I also sweep away the extinct one. We never know. It is useful to
my volcanoes, and it is useful to my flower, that I possess them. But you are not useful to
the stars É
Ň
The businessman opened his mouth but found no answer, and the little prince left.
ŇThe grown-ups are definitely quite extraordinary,
Ó he said simply to himself during the
journey.

CHAPTER XIV
The fifth planet was very curious. It was the smallest of them all. There was just enough
room to house a lamppost and a street lamp lighter. The little prince could not explain how
a street lamp and a lamp-lighter could be used, somewhere in the sky, on a planet without
a house or a population. However, he said to himself:
ŇMaybe this man is absurd. However, it is less absurd than the king, the vain, the
businessman and the drinker. At least his work makes sense. When he lights his lamppost,
it is as if he were creating another star, or a flower. When he turns off his lamppost, it puts
the flower or the star to sleep. It is a very pretty occupation. This is really useful since it is
beautiful.
Ň
When he approached the planet he greeted the lighter respectfully:
Ó Hello. Why did you just turn off your street lamp?
ŇThat is the order,
Ó replied the lighter. Hello.
ŇWhat is the deposit?Ó
ŇIt is to extinguish my lamppost.
Ó Good evening.
Ň
And he rekindled it.
ŇBut why have you just turned it on?Ó
ŇThat is the order,
Ó replied the lighter.
ŇI do not understand,
Ó said the little prince.
ŇThere is nothing to understand,
Ó said the lighter. The setpoint is the setpoint. Hello.
Ó
And he put out his street lamp.
Then he wiped his forehead with a red-checked handkerchief.
ŇI am doing a terrible trade there. It was reasonable in the past. I switched off in the
morning and switched on at night. I had the rest of the day to rest, and the rest of the night
to sleep É
Ó
ŇAnd since that time the order has changed?Ó
ŇThe order has not changed,
Ó said the lighter. That is the tragedy! The planet from year to
year has turned faster and faster, and the deposit has not changed!
- So ? Said the little prince.
ŇSo now that she is doing one turn a minute, I have no more rest.
Ó I turn on and off once a
minute!
- Now thatŐs funny ! The days at your house last a minute!
ŇItŐs not funny at all,
Ó said the lighter. ItŐs been a month since weŐve been talking together.
- A month ?
- Y es. Thirty minutes. Thirty days ! Good evening.
Ň
And he reignited his lamppost.
The little prince looked at him and he loved this lighter who was so faithful to the
instructions. He remembered the sunsets that he himself once went looking for, drawing
his chair. He wanted to help his friend:
ŇYou know É I know a way to rest when you want É
Ó
ŇI always want,
Ó said the lighter.
For one can be both faithful and lazy.
The little prince continued:
ŇY our planet is so small that you go around it in three strides. Y ou only have to walk
slowly to stay in the sun. When you want to rest you will walk É and the day will last as
long as you want.
ŇIt does not help me much,
Ó said the lighter. What I like about life is sleeping.
ŇItŐs not lucky,
Ó said the little prince.
ŇNo luck,
Ó said the lighter. Hello.
Ň
And he put out his street lamp.
ŇThat one,
Ó said the little prince,
Ňas he pursued his journey further, he would be despised
by all the others, by the king, by the vain, by the drinker, by the businessman.
Ó However,
it is the only one that does not seem ridiculous to me. It is, perhaps, because he cares about
nothing but himself.
Ň
He sighed with regret and said to himself again:
ŇThis is the only one I could have made my friend. But his planet is really too small.
There is no room for two É Č
What the little prince did not dare to admit was that he regretted this blessed planet
because, above all, of the thousand four hundred and forty sunsets in twenty-four hours!

CHAPTER  XV
The sixth planet was a planet ten times larger. It was inhabited by an old gentleman who
wrote enormous books.
ŇHere! Here is an explorer! Cried he, when he perceived the little prince.
The little prince sat down on the table and breathed a little. He already had traveled so
much !
Ó Where do you come from ? Said the old gentleman.
- What is this big book? Said the little prince. What are you doing here ?
ŇI am a geographer,
Ó said the old gentleman.
ŇWhat is a geographer?Ó
ŇHe is a scientist who knows where the seas, rivers, cities, mountains and deserts are.
ŇThat is very interesting,
Ó said the little prince. ItŐs finally a real job! And he cast a glance
around him on the geographerŐs planet. He had never seen a planet so majestic.
ŇIt is very beautiful, your planet. Are there oceans ?
ŇI can not know,
Ó said the geographer.
ŇAh! (The little prince was disappointed.) And mountains?
ŇI can not know,
Ó said the geographer.
ŇAnd cities and rivers and deserts?Ó
ŇI can not know it either,
Ó said the geographer.
ŇBut you are a geographer!
ŇThatŐs right,
Ó said the geographer,
Ňbut I am not an explorer. I absolutely lack explorers.
It is not the geographer who will count cities, rivers, mountains, seas, oceans and deserts.
The geographer is too important to stroll. He does not leave his office. But he receives the
explorers there. He interrogates them, and takes note of their memories. And if the
memories of one of them seem interesting to him, the geographer makes investigate the
morality of the explorer.
- Why this ?
ŇBecause an explorer who lies would cause catastrophes in the books of geography.
Ó And
also an explorer who would drink too much.
- Why this ? Said the little prince.
ŇBecause drunks see double.
Ó Then the geographer would note two mountains, where
there is only one.
ŇI know somebody,
Ó said the little prince, who would be a bad explorer.
- ItŐs possible. So when the morality of the explorer seems good, an inquiry is made into
his discovery.
- We will see ?
- No. ItŐs too complicated. But the explorer is required to provide evidence. If, for
example, the discovery of a large mountain is required, it is required to bring large stones.
Ň
The geographer was suddenly moved.
ŇBut you come from a distance! YouŐre an explorer! YouŐre going to describe your planet!
Ň
And the geographer, having opened his register, cut his pencil. We first note in pencil the
narratives of the explorers. It is expected, to note in ink, that the explorer has provided
evidence.
Ó So ? Inquired the geographer.
- Oh ! At home,
Ňsaid the little prince,
Ó itŐs not very interesting, itŐs very small. I have
three volcanoes. Two active volcanoes, and an extinct volcano. But we never know.
ŇYou never know,
Ó said the geographer.
- I also have a flower.
ŇWe do not notice flowers,
Ó said the geographer.
- Why this ! This is the nicest!
ŇBecause flowers are ephemeral.
Ó
- What does ÔephemeralŐ mean?
ŇGeographies,
Ó said the geographer,
Ňare the most serious books in all books. They never
go out of style. It is very rare that a mountain changes its place. It is very rare that an
ocean empties its water. We write eternal things.
ŇBut the extinct volcanoes can wake up,
Ó interrupted the little prince. What does
ŇephemeralÓ mean?
ŇWhether volcanoes are extinguished or awakened is the same for us,
Ó said the
geographer. What matters to us is the mountain. It does not change.
ŇBut what doesÓ ephemeral Ňmean? Repeated the little prince, who had never given up a
question in his life once he had asked it.
- It means Ňwho is threatened with the near disappearanceÓ
.
- My flower is threatened with disappearance soon?
- Of course.
ŇMy flower is ephemeral,
Ó thought the little prince,
Ňand she has only four thorns to
defend herself against the world! And I left her alone with me! Ň
This was his first movement of regret. But he resumed his courage:
ŇWhat do you advise me to visit?Ó He asked.
ŇPlanet Earth,
Ó replied the geographer. She has a good reputation É
Ň
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower.

CHAPTER XVI
The seventh planet was therefore the Earth.
The Earth is not a planet of any kind! There are a hundred and eleven kings (not
forgetting, of course, the Negro kings), seven thousand geographers, nine hundred
thousand businessmen, seven and a half million drunkards, three hundred and eleven
million vain, About two billion large people.
To give you an idea of the dimensions of the Earth, I will tell you that before the invention
of electricity there was to be maintained on all six continents a genuine army of four
hundred and sixty-two thousand five hundred and eleven lighters Of street lamps.
Seen from a little distance it made a splendid effect. The movements of this army were
regulated like those of an operatic ballet. First came the turn of street lamp lighterers from
New Zealand and Australia. Then, having lit their lanterns, they went to sleep. Then the
dancers of the lamps of China and Siberia entered the dance. Then they also slipped
backstage. Then came the turn of the lighters of street lamps of Russia and the Indies.
Then those of Africa and Europe. Then those of South America. Then those of North
America. And they never erred in their order of entry. It was great.
Only the lighter of the single street-lamp of the North Pole, and his colleague of the only
street lamp of the South Pole, led lives of idleness and nonchalance: they worked twice a
year.

CHAPTER XVII
When one wants to make the mind, it happens that one lying a little. I was not very honest
in telling you about street light lighter. I risk giving a false idea of our planet to those who
do not know it. Men occupy very little space on earth. If the two billion inhabitants who
inhabit the land were standing up and a little tight, as if for a meeting, they would easily
lodge in a public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide. We could put humanity
on the smallest little island in the Pacific.
Great people, of course, will not believe you. They imagine they hold a lot of space. They
see themselves important as baobabs. Y ou will advise them to do the calculation. They
love the numbers: it will please them. But do not waste your time on this pensum. ItŐs
useless. Y ou trust me.
The little prince, once on land, was therefore much surprised to see no one. He was
already afraid of being mistaken about the planet, when a ring of moonlight stirred in the
sand.
ŇGood night,
Ó said the little prince, at all hazards.
ŇGood night,
Ó said the serpent.
- On what planet have I fallen? Asked the little prince.
ŇOn the Earth, in Africa,
Ó replied the serpent.
ŇAh! É So there is nobody on Earth?
ŇHere is the desert.
Ó There is no one in the deserts. The Earth is great,
Ňsays the serpent.
The little prince sat down on a stone and raised his eyes to the sky:
ŇI wonder,
Ó he said,
Ňif the stars are illuminated so that everyone can one day find his
own. Look at my planet. SheŐs just above us É But how far she is!
ŇShe is beautiful,
Ó said the serpent. What are you doing here ?
ŇI have difficulties with a flower,
Ó said the little prince.
ŇAh! The serpent said.
And they were silent.
Ó Where are the men ? Resumed the little prince. WeŐre a little alone in the desert É
ŇOne is also alone among men,
Ó said the serpent.
The little prince looked at him for a long time:
ŇYou are a funny beast,
Ó he said at last, thin as a finger.
ŇBut I am more powerful than the finger of a king,
Ó said the serpent.
The little prince smiled:
ŇYouŐre not very powerful É you do not even have paws É you can not even travel É
ŇI can carry you farther than a ship,
Ó said the serpent.
He wrapped himself around the ankle of the little prince, like a gold bracelet:
ŇThe one I touch, I return to the earth from which he came out,
Ó he said again. But you are
pure and you come from a star É
Ň
The little prince answered nothing.
ŇYou pity me, you so weak, on this Granite Earth. I can help you someday if you regret
too much your planet. I canÉ
- Oh ! I understood very well,
Ňsaid the little prince,
Ó but why do you always speak in
riddles?
ŇI will resolve them all,
Ó said the serpent.
And they fell silent.

CHAPTER XVIII
The little prince crossed the desert and met only a flower. A flower with three petals, a
flower of nothing at all É
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the little prince.
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the flower.
- Where are the men ? The little prince asked politely.
The flower, one day, had seen a caravan pass:
Ó Men ? There are, I believe, six or seven of them. I saw them years ago. But you never
know where to find them. The wind sends them rambling. They lack roots, they are very
embarrassed.
ŇGood-bye,
Ó said the little prince.
ŇAdieu,
Ó said the flower.

CHAPTER XIX
The little prince ascended a high mountain. The only mountains he had ever known were
the three volcanoes that came to his knee. And he used the extinct volcano as a stool.
ŇFrom a mountain high like this,
Ó he said to himself,
ŇI shall suddenly see the whole
planet and all the men.
Ó But he perceived nothing but sharp needles of rock.
ŇGood morning,
Ó he said at random.
- Hello É Hello É Hello É replied the echo.
- Who are you ? Said the little prince.
ŇWho are you? Who are you? Who are you?Ó Replied the echo.
ŇBe my friends, I am alone,
Ó he said.
ŇI am alone É I am alone É I am alone É
Ó replied the echo.
ŇWhat a strange planet! He thought then. It is quite dry, and all pointed and salty. And men
lack imagination. They repeat what they are told É At home I had a flower: it always
spoke first É
Ň

CHAPTER XX
But it happened that the little prince, having for a long time walked through the sands, the
rocks and the snows, at length discovered a road. And the roads all go to men.
ŇGood morning,
Ó he said.
It was a garden full of roses.
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the roses.
The little prince looked at them. They all looked like her flower.
Ó Who are you ? He asked, stunned.
ŇWe are roses,
Ó said the roses.
ŇAh! Said the little prince.
And he felt very unhappy. Her flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind in
the universe. And there were five thousand, all alike, in one garden!
ŇShe would be very upset,
Ó he said to herself,
Ňif she saw that-she would cough so much
and pretend to die to escape ridicule.
Ó And I would be obliged to pretend to treat her, for
otherwise, to humiliate me too, she would really let herself die É
Ň
Then he said to himself again: ŇI thought myself rich with a single flower, and I possess
only an ordinary rose. That and my three volcanoes which reach me at the knee, and one
of which, perhaps, is extinct forever, does not make me a great prince É
ŇAnd, lying in
the grass, he will cry.

CHAPTER XXI
And then the Fox appeared :
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the fox.
ŇGood morning,
Ó replied the little prince, politely, who turned, but saw nothing.
ŇI am here,
Ó said the voice,
Ňunder the apple-tree.
Ó
- Who are you ? Said the little prince. YouŐre quite prettyÉ
ŇI am a fox,
Ó said the fox.
ŇCome play with me,
Ó suggested the little prince. IŐm so sadÉ
ŇI can not play with you,
Ó said the fox. I am not domesticated.
ŇAh! Pardon,
Ňsaid the little prince.
But after reflection, he added:
Ó What does ŇtameÓ mean Ó ?
ŇYouŐre not from here,
Ó said the fox,
Ňwhat are you looking for?Ó
ŇI am looking for men,
Ó said the little prince. What does ŇtameÓ mean Ó ?
ŇMen,
Ó said the fox,
Ňthey have rifles and they hunt.
Ó It is very embarrassing! They also
breed chickens. That is their only interest. Are you looking for chickens?
ŇNo,
Ó said the little prince. I am looking for some friends. What does ŇtameÓ mean?
ŇItŐs too forgotten,
Ó said the fox. It means ŇCreate links É
Ó
- Create links ?
ŇOf course,
Ó said the fox. You are but a little boy to me, like a hundred thousand little
boys. And I do not need you. And you do not need me either. I am only a fox to you like a
hundred thousand foxes. But if you tame me, we will need one another. You will be
unique in the world for me. I will be for you unique in the world É
ŇI begin to understand,
Ó said the little prince. There is a flower É I think she tamed me É
ŇIt is possible,
Ó said the fox. We see all sorts of things on Earth É
- Oh ! It is not on Earth,
Ňsaid the little prince.
The fox seemed very intrigued:
ŇOn another planetÓ?
- Y es.
ŇThere are hunters on this planet?Ó
- No.
- ThatŐs interesting! And hens?
- No.
ŇNothing is perfect,
Ó the fox sighed.
But the fox returned to his idea:
ŇMy life is monotonous. I chase chickens, men chase me. All the chickens resemble each
other, and all men are alike. So IŐm a little bored. But if you tame me, my life will be as
sunny. I will experience a footstep that will be different from all the others. The other steps
make me go underground. Y ours will call me out of the burrow, like a music. And look!
You see, over there, the fields of wheat? I do not eat bread. Wheat for me is useless. The
wheat fields do not remind me of anything. And thatŐs sad! But you have golden hair.
Then it will be wonderful when you have tamed me! The wheat, which is gilded, will
make me remember you. And I will love the sound of the wind in wheat É
Ň
The fox fell silent and looked at the little prince for a long time:
ŇPlease É tame me!Ó ŇHe said.
ŇI will,
Ó replied the little prince,
and a lot to know.
Ňbut I have not much time.
Ó I have friends to discover
ŇWe only know the things we tame,
Ó said the fox. Men no longer have the time to know
anything. They buy ready-made things from merchants. But as there are no merchants of
friends, men no longer have friends. If you want a friend, tame me!
- What should be done ? Said the little prince.
ŇYou must be very patient,
Ó replied the fox. You will sit first a little far from me, like that,
in the grass. I will look at you from the corner of your eye and you will not say anything.
Language is a source of misunderstanding. But every day you can sit a little closer É
Ň
The next day the little prince returned.
ŇIt would have been better to return at the same hour,
Ó said the fox. If you come, for
example, at four oŐclock in the afternoon, at three oŐclock I shall begin to be happy. The
more time will come, the more happy I will feel. At four oŐclock I shall be agitated and
worried; I shall discover the price of happiness! But if you come anytime, I will never
know what time to dress my heart É it takes rites.
ŇWhat is a rite?Ó Said the little prince.
ŇItŐs too much forgotten,
Ó said the fox. This is what makes one day different from other
days, one hour, other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. They dance
on Thursday with the girls of the village. Then Thursday is a wonderful day! IŐll walk up
the vineyard. If the hunters danced at any time, the days would all be alike, and I would
have no holiday.
Ň
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of departure was near:
ŇAh! Said the fox,
ŇI will weep.
Ó
ŇIt is your fault,
Ó said the little prince,
ŇI did not wish you any harm, but you wanted me
to tame you.
Ó
ŇOf course,
Ó said the fox.
ŇBut youŐre going to cry!Ó Said the little prince.
ŇOf course,
Ó said the fox.
ŇThen you gain nothing!Ó
ŇI win,
Ó said the fox,
Ňbecause of the color of the corn.
Ó
Then he added:
ŇGo and see the roses again. Y ou will understand that yours is unique in the world. Y ou
will return to say good-bye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret.
Ň
The little prince went to see the roses again.
ŇYou are not at all like my rose, you are nothing yet,
Ó he said. No one has tame you and
you have not tame anyone. YouŐre like was my fox. It was only a fox like a hundred
thousand others. But I made him my friend, and he is now unique in the world.
Ň
And the roses were very embarrassed.
ŇYou are beautiful, but you are empty,
Ó he said again. You can not die for you. Of course,
my rose, an ordinary passer-by would think that she resembles you. But it alone is more
important than you all, since it is she that I watered. Since it was she whom I placed under
the globe, since it was she whom I sheltered by the screen. Since it is she whose
caterpillars I have killed (except the two or three for butterflies). Since it is she whom I
have listened to, complaining, or boasting, or even sometimes silent. Since it is my rose.
Ň
And he returned to the fox:
ŇAdieu,
Ó he said.
ŇGood-bye,
Ó said the fox. Here is my secret. It is very simple: one sees only with the
heart. What is essential is invisible to the eye.
ŇThe essential thing is invisible to the eyes,
Ó repeated the little prince, in order to
remember.
- ItŐs the time you lost for your rose that makes your rose so important.
ŇItŐs the time I lost for my rose,
Ó said the little prince, in order to remember.
ŇMen have forgotten this truth,
Ó said the fox. But you must not forget it. You become
responsible forever for what you have tamed. YouŐre responsible for your rose É
ŇI am responsible for my rose,
Ó repeated the little prince, in order to remember.

CHAPTER XXII
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the little prince.
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the switchman.
- What are you doing here ? Said the little prince.
ŇIŐm sorting out the travelers, in bundles of a thousand,
Ó said the switchman. I ship the
trains that take them, sometimes to the right, sometimes to the left.
Ň
And a flashing light, thundering like a roar, made the switching cab tremble.
ŇThey are in a great hurry,
Ó said the little prince. What are they looking for ?
ŇThe man of the locomotive ignores it himself,
Ó said the switchman.
And in a reverse direction, a second illuminated flash fell.
ŇTheyŐre coming back already?Ó Asked the little prince.
ŇThey are not the same,
Ó said the switchman. ItŐs an exchange.
ŇThey were not happy, where they were?Ó
ŇOne is never satisfied where one is,
Ó said the switchman.
And scolded the thunder of a third rapid illuminated.
ŇThey are pursuing the first travelers? Asked the little prince.
ŇThey are not pursuing anything at all,
Ó said the switchman. They sleep in it, or they
yawn. The children alone crush their noses against the windows.
ŇChildren alone know what they are looking for,
Ó said the little prince. They lose time for
a rag doll, and it becomes very important, and if they are taken away, they cry É
ŇTheyŐre lucky,
Ó said the switchman.

CHAPTER XXIII
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the little prince.
ŇGood morning,
Ó said the merchant.
He was a merchant of sophisticated pills which appeased thirst. One swallows one a week,
and one no longer feels the need to drink.
ŇWhy do you sell that?Ó Said the little prince.
ŇItŐs a big saving of time,
Ó said the merchant. Experts have made calculations. We save
fifty-three minutes a week.
ŇAnd what do we do for fifty-three minutes?Ó
- We make what we want É
Ň
ŇI,
Ó said the little prince,
towards a fountain.
Ó
Ňif I had fifty-three minutes to spend, I would walk slowly

CHAPTER XXIV
We were on the eighth day of my breakdown in the desert, and I had listened to the
merchantŐs story, drinking the last drop of my supply of water:
ŇAh! ŇI said to the little prince,
Ó they are very pretty, your memories, but I have not yet
repaired my plane, I have nothing more to drink, and I should also be happy if I could
walk gently towards a fountain !
ŇMy friend, the fox,
Ó he said.
ŇMy little fellow, itŐs no longer the fox!Ó
- Why ?
ŇBecause weŐre going to die of thirst É
Ó
He did not understand my reasoning, but he replied:
ŇItŐs nice to have a friend, even if weŐre going to die. I am very glad to have had a friend
fox É
Ň
ŇHe does not measure danger,
Ó I said. He never has neither hunger nor thirst. A little
sunlight is enough É Č
But he looked at me and answered my thought:
ŇIŐm thirsty too É look for a well É
Ó
I made a gesture of weariness: it is absurd to look for a well, at random, in the immensity
of the desert. Nevertheless, we set out on the march.
When we had walked for hours, in silence, night fell, and the stars began to light. I saw
them as if in a dream, having a little fever, because of my thirst. The words of the little
prince danced in my memory:
ŇAre you thirsty then, too?Ó I asked him.
But he did not answer my question. He simply says:
ŇWater can also be good for the heart É
Ó
I did not understand his answer but I was silent É I knew that he should not be
interrogated.
He was tired. He sat. I sat down beside him. And after a pause he said,
ŇThe stars are
beautiful, because of a flower that one does not see É
Ó
I answered Ňof courseÓ and I looked, without speaking, the folds of sand under the moon.
ŇThe desert is beautiful,
Ó he added.
And it was true. I have always loved the desert. It sits on a sand dune. We see nothing.
Nothing is heard. And yet something radiates in silenceÉ
ŇWhat beautifies the desert,
Ó said the little prince,
Ňis that he hides a well somewhereÉ
Ó
I was surprised to suddenly understand this mysterious radiance of the sand. When I was a
little boy I lived in an old house, and legend had it that a treasure was buried there. Of
course, no one has ever discovered it, nor perhaps even sought it. But he delighted the
whole house. My house hid a secret in the depths of her heartÉ
ŇY es,
Ó said I to the little prince,
Ňwhether it be the house, the stars or the desert, what
makes their beauty invisible!
ŇI am satisfied,
Ó he said,
Ňthat you agree with my fox.
Ó
As the little prince fell asleep, I took him in my arms, and set off again. I was touched. It
seemed to me to carry a fragile treasure. It even seemed to me that there was nothing more
fragile on Earth. In the light of the moon I looked at that pale brow, those closed eyes, the
locks of hair that trembled in the wind, and I said to myself: ŇWhat I see here is only a
bark. The most important is invisible É Č
As his half-opened lips were half-smiling, I said to myself: ŇWhat moves me so strongly
about this little prince asleep is his fidelity to a flower, it is the image of a rose Radiates in
him like the flame of a lamp, even when he sleeps É
ŇAnd I guessed it even more fragile.
It is necessary to protect the lamps: a gust of wind can extinguish them É
And, walking thus, I discovered the well at dawn.

CHAPTER XXV
ŇMen,
Ó said the little prince,
Ňthey go into the rapids, but they do not know what they are
looking for.
Ó Then they move and turn in circles É
And he added:
Ó ItŐs not worth itÉ
Ň
The well we reached did not resemble the Saharan wells. The Saharan wells are simple
holes dug in the sand. This one resembled a village well. But there was no village there,
and I thought I was dreaming.
ŇItŐs strange,
Ó I said to the little prince,
Ňeverything is ready: the pulley, the bucket and the
Ó
rope É
He laughed, touched the rope, and pulled the pulley. And the pulley moaned as an old
weathervane moaned when the wind had long slept.
ŇYou hear,
Ó said the little prince,
I did not want him to make an effort:
Ňwe awaken this well and sings É
Ó
ŇLet me do it,
Ó I said,
ŇitŐs too heavy for you.
Ň
Slowly I hoisted the bucket up to the curb. I installed him there plumb. In my ears was the
song of the pulley, and in the still trembling water I saw the sun shaking.
ŇI am thirsty for that water,
Ó said the little prince,
Ňgive me something to drink.
Ó
And I understood what he had been looking for!
I lifted the bucket to her lips. He drank, his eyes closed. It was as sweet as a party. This
water was much more than a food. It was born of the march under the stars, the song of the
pulley, the effort of my arms. It was good for the heart, as a gift. When I was a little boy,
the light of the Christmas tree, the music of the midnight mass, the sweetness of the smiles
made all the radiance of the Christmas present that I received.
ŇThe men of your house,
Ó said the little prince,
Ňcultivate five thousand roses in the same
garden, and they do not find what they seek.
Ó
ŇThey do not find it,
Ó I replied.
- And yet what they are looking for could be found in a single rose or a little water É
ŇOf course,
Ó I replied.
And the little prince added:
ŇBut the eyes are blind. Y ou must seek with your heart.
Ň
I was drunk. I breathed well. The sand at daybreak is honey-colored. I was also pleased
with this color of honey. Why should I have trouble?
ŇYou must keep your promise,
Ó said the little prince, who had once more sat down beside
me.
ŇWhat promise?Ó
- You know É a muzzle for my sheep É I am responsible for this flower! Ň
I took out my drawing sketches from my pocket. The little prince perceived them and said,
laughing:
ŇY our baobabs, they look a bit like cabbages É
Ó
- Oh ! Ň
I who was so proud of the baobabs!
ŇY our fox É his ears É they look a bit like horns É and they are too long! Ň
And he laughs again.
ŇYou are unjust, little fellow, I knew nothing to draw but boas closed and boas open.
- Oh ! It will go, he said, the children know.
Ň
So I cracked a muzzle. And I had my heart tight and gave it to her:
ŇYou have projects I do not know É
Ó
But he did not answer me. He tells me :
ŇYou know, my fall on Earth É tomorrow will be the anniversaryÉ
Ó
Then, after a pause, he said,
ŇI fell very close hereÉ
Ó
And he blushed.
And again, without understanding why, I experienced a bizarre grief. However, a question
came to me:
ŇThen it was not by chance that the morning I met you a week ago, you walked like that,
all alone, a thousand miles from all the inhabited regions! You were returning to the point
of your fall? Ň
The little prince blushed again.
And I added, hesitating:
ŇPerhaps because of the birthday?Ó
The little prince blushed again. He never answered questions, but when you blush, it
means ŇyesÓ
, is not it?
ŇAh! Said I,
ŇI am afraid.
Ó
But he answered:
ŇYou have to work now. You have to go back to your machine. IŐm waiting for you here.
Come back tomorrow night É
Ň
But I was not reassured. I remembered the fox. We risk crying a little if we let ourselves
tameÉ

CHAPTER XXVI
There was, beside the well, a ruin of an old stone wall. When I returned from my work the
next evening, I saw from afar my little prince sitting up there with his legs dangling. And I
heard him speak:
ŇSo you do not remember?Ó he said. ItŐs not quite here! Ň
Another voice, no doubt, replied, for he replied,
Ó Y es ! Y es ! ItŐs the day, but itŐs not here É
Ň
I continued my walk towards the wall. I did not see or hear anyone. Y et the little prince
replied again:
Ó
É Of course. You will see where my trace begins in the sand. Y ou just have to wait for
me. IŐll be there tonight.
Ň
I was twenty meters from the wall and I still could not see anything.
The little prince said again, after a silence:
ŇYou have good venom?Ó Are you sure you will not make me suffer for a long time?Ó
I stopped, my heart tight, but I still did not understand.
ŇNow go,
Ó he said,
ŇI want to go down again!Ó Ň
Then I lowered my eyes to the foot of the wall, and I jumped! He was there, standing
toward the little prince, one of those yellow snakes that execute you in thirty seconds. As I
rummaged through my pocket to take out my revolver, I took the step, but at the noise I
made, the serpent slowly sank into the sand, like a stream of water that dies, Pressing,
slipped between the stones with a slight metallic sound. I reached the wall just in time to
receive in my arms my little prince, pale as snow.
ŇWhat is that story?Ó You talk now with snakes! Ň
I had undone his eternal golden cowl. I had wet her temples and made her drink. And now
I dared not ask him anything. He looked at me gravely and wrapped his arms around me. I
felt his heart beat like that of a bird that dies, when it has been shot with a rifle. He tells
me:
ŇIŐm glad you found what was missing from your machine. You can go home É
- How do you know ! Ň
I had just told him that, against all hope, I had succeeded in my work!
He did not answer my question, but he added:
ŇI too, today, go home É
Ó
Attraction.jpg
Then, melancholy:
ŇItŐs much further É itŐs much harder É
Ó
I felt that something extraordinary was happening. I held him in his arms like a little child,
and yet it seemed to me that he was flowing vertically into an abyss without anything to
restrain him.
He had a serious look, lost very far:
ŇI have your sheep. And I have the case for the sheep. And I have the muzzle É
Ň
And he smiled with melancholy.
I waited a long time. I felt that it was getting warmer by degrees:
ŇLittle fellow, you were afraid É
Ó
He was afraid, of course! But he laughed softly:
ŇIŐll be more afraid tonight É
Ó
Again I felt cold from the feeling of the irreparable. And I realized that I could not bear
the idea of never hearing this laugh again. It was for me like a fountain in the desert.
ŇLittle fellow, I still want to hear you laugh É
Ó
But he said to me:
ŇTonight it will be a year. My star will be just above the place where I fell last year É
ŇLittle fellow, is it not a bad dream of a snake, a rendezvous, and a star?Ó
But he did not answer my question. He tells me :
ŇWhatŐs important is not seen É
Ó
- Of courseÉ
- ItŐs like the flower. If you love a flower that is in a star, itŐs sweet, at night, to look at the
sky. All the stars are flourished.
- Of courseÉ
- ItŐs like water. The one you gave me to drink was like music, because of the pulley and
the rope É you remember É it was good.
- Of courseÉ
- You will watch, at night, the stars. ItŐs too small for me to show you where mine is. ItŐs
better like that. My star, it will be for you one of the stars. So, all the stars, you will love to
look at them É They will be all your friends. And then IŐll give you a present É
Ó
He laughed again.
ŇAh! Little fellow, little fellow, I like to hear this laughter!
- It will be my gift É it will be like water É
- What do you mean ?
- People have stars that are not the same. For some, who travel, the stars are guides. For
others they are nothing but small lights. For others who are scholars they are problems.
For my businessman they were gold. But all these stars are silent. Y ou will have stars like
no one has É
- What do you mean ?
ŇWhen you look at the sky at night, since I will live in one of them, since I will laugh in
one of them, then it will be for you as if all the stars were laughing.
Ó You will have stars
that can laugh! Ň
And he laughs again.
ŇAnd when you are comforted (we always console ourselves) you will be glad to have
known me. Y ou will always be my friend. Y ouŐll want to laugh with me. And sometimes
youŐll open your window for fun É And your friends will be astonished to see you
laughing at the sky. Then you will say to them: ŇY es, the stars, it always makes me laugh!Ó
And they will believe you crazy. IŐll have played you a nasty trick É
Ó
And he laughs again.
ŇIt will be as if I had given you, instead of stars, lots of little bells that know how to laugh
Ó
É
And he laughs again. Then he became serious again:
ŇThat night É you know É do not come.
- I will not leave you.
ŇI shall look as if I am in pain. I shall look a little like die.
Ó ItŐs like that. Do not come and
see this, itŐs not worth it É
- I will not leave you.
Ň
But he was anxious.
ŇI tell you that É itŐs because of the snake as well. He must not bite you É Snakes are
bad. It can bite for fun É
- I will not leave you.
But something reassured him :
ŇItŐs true they have no more venom for the second bite É
Ó
That night I did not see him set off. He had escaped quietly. When I succeeded in joining
him, he walked resolutely, with a rapid step. He only said to me:
ŇAh! you are theÉ
Ň
And he took me by the hand. But he was still tormented:
Ó You were wrong. YouŐll have trouble. I shall look as if I am dead, and it will not be true.
Ň
I was silent.
Ó You understand. It is too far. I cannot carry that body. ItŐs too heavy.
Ň
I was silent.
ŇBut it will be like an old abandoned bark. ItŐs not sad the old bark É
Ň
I was silent.
He was discouraged a little. But he made another effort:
ŇItŐll be nice, you know. I too will look at the stars. All the stars will be wells with a rusty
pulley. All the stars will pour me to drink É
Ň
I was silent.
ŇIt will be so much fun! You will have five hundred million bells, I will have five hundred
million fountains É
Ň
And he was silent too, because he was crying É
Ó ItŐs here. Let me step on my own.
Ň
And he sat down because he was afraid.
He says,
ŇYou know É my flower É I am responsible! And sheŐs so weak! And sheŐs so naive.
She has four thorns of nothing to protect her from the world É
Ň
I sat down because I could not stand. He says :
Ó ThatŐs it thatŐs allÉ
Ň
He hesitated again a little, then he stood up. He took a step. I could not move.
There was nothing but a yellow flash near his ankle. He remained motionless for a
moment. He did not shout. He fell Gently as a tree falls. It did not even make a noise,
because of the sand.
Il tomba doucement comme tombe un arbre.

CHAPTER XXVII
And now, of course, itŐs been six years already É IŐve never told this story yet. The
comrades who saw me were glad to see me alive again. I was sad but I said to them: ŇItŐs
fatigue É
Ó
Now I have comforted myself a little. That is É not quite. But I know that he has returned
to his planet, for at daybreak I have not found his body. It was not such a heavy body É
And I like the night listening to the stars. ItŐs like five hundred million bells É
But now something extraordinary happens. The muzzle I designed for the little prince, I
forgot to add the leather strap! He could never tie her to the sheep. So I ask myself,
ŇWhat
happened on his planet?Ó Maybe the sheep ate the flower É
Ň
Sometimes I say to myself: ŇSurely not! The little prince encloses his flower every night
under his globe of glass, and he watches his sheep well.
ŇThen I am happy. And all the
stars laughed softly.
Sometimes I say to myself: ŇOne is distracted once or the other, and that is enough! He
forgot one evening the globe of glass, or else the sheep went out quietly during the nightÉ
ŇThen the bells changed into tears! É
This is a great mystery. For you who love the little prince as well as for me, nothing of the
universe is alike if somewhere, one does not know where, a sheep that we do not know
has, yes or no, eaten a rose É
Look at the sky. Ask yourself: ŇDid the sheep or not eat the flower? And you will see how
everything changes É
And no big person will ever understand that itŐs so important!
This is, for me, the most beautiful and saddest landscape in the world. ItŐs the same
landscape as the one on the previous page, but I drew it once more to show it to you. It is
here that the little prince appeared on earth, then disappeared.
Look carefully at this landscape to be sure of recognizing it, if you travel to Africa one
day in the desert. And, if you happen to pass by there, I beseech you, do not hurry, wait a
little right under the star! If a child comes to you, if he laughs, if he has golden hair, if he
does not answer when asked, you will guess who he is. So be nice! Do not leave me so
sad: write to me quickly that he has come backÉ